Add tutorial for ROS 2 galactic [12701] (#126)
eProsima/Fast-DDS-monitor: docs/rst/ros/galactic/galactic.rst

########

This section shows how to install and deploy some ROS 2 galactic nodes in order to monitor them with Fast DDS Monitor.
It assumes that

Installation
============

First of all, follow the :ref:`installation_manual_linux` on this documentation to install the Fast DDS Monitor.

Fast DDS is not installed by default in the ROS 2 Galactic release.
Thus, first step is required is to download Fast DDS and compile it with statistics.

Installation from sources
-------------------------

Follow the `ROS 2 galactic installation from sources documentation
<https://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Installation/Ubuntu-Development-Setup.html>`_
Fast DDS is downloaded within the rest of the packages.
The only consideration here is to compile :code:`fastrtps` library with the Statistics Module activated.
When compiling with colcon, add this arguments as:

.. code-block:: bash

    colcon build --symlink-install --cmake-args -DFASTDDS_STATISTICS=ON

.. todo:

    Add Installation from binaries option

Execution
=========

We are going to recreate a simple DDS network with one :code:`talker` and one :code:`listener` from ROS 2 demo nodes.

Execute Fast DDS Monitor
------------------------

> Initiate Fast DDS Monitor by the executable created by the installation process.

Author: :+1:

> Once into the Fast DDS Monitor window, start a monitor in domain :code:`0` (default domain).

Author: :+1:

.. figure:: /rst/figures/screenshots/usage_example/init_domain.png
    :align: center

Execute ROS 2 demo nodes with statistics
----------------------------------------

To execute ROS 2 nodes with statistics two configurations must be taken into account:

- The middleware used must be Fast DDS, set by an environmental variable.

> - To activate the report of statistic data, Fast DDS requires to use an environmental variable setting up those

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In order to activate the publication of statistical data, Fast DDS requires an environment variable specifying those
```

Author: :+1:

>     statistic kinds that are going to be reported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    kinds of statistical data to be reported.
```

Author: :+1:

To execute each of the nodes, run the following commands in different terminals:

.. code-block:: bash

    export RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp

>     export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;SUBSCRIPTION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC" # add as many statistics topic as wanted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;SUBSCRIPTION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC" # add as many statistics topics as wanted
```

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener

.. code-block:: bash

    export RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp

>     export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;SUBSCRIPTION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC" # add as many statistics topic as wanted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;SUBSCRIPTION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC" # add as many statistics topics as wanted
```

Author: :+1:

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp talker

Remember to source your `ROS 2 installation
<https://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Installation/Ubuntu-Development-Setup.html?highlight=source#source-the-setup-script>`_
before every ros2 command.

Monitoring network
------------------

> Now you must see in the Fast DDS Monitor two new Participants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you should see in the DDS panel two new Participants.
```

.. figure:: /rst/figures/screenshots/galactic_tutorial/participants.png
    :align: center

Alias
^^^^^

> Participants in ROS 2 are called :code:`\ `.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Participants in ROS 2 are named :code:`\ ` by default.
```

> In order to differentiate them you could :ref:`change_alias`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to differentiate them one could :ref:`change_alias`.
```

Author: :+1:

> The :code:`talker` would be the one with one writer, and the :code:`listener` with a reader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :code:`talker` would be the one with one writer, and the :code:`listener` the one with a reader.
```

.. figure:: /rst/figures/screenshots/galactic_tutorial/alias.png
    :align: center

Physical data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In order to see the information about the host and the physical context where every node is running, go to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to see the information of the host and the physical context where every node is running, go to
```

Author: :+1:

the :ref:`left_panel` and activate the :ref:`physical_panel`.

> There are shown the host, user and process of each node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There, the host, user and process of each node are displayed.
```

.. figure:: /rst/figures/screenshots/galactic_tutorial/physical.png
    :align: center

Statistical data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To show statistical data about the communication between the :code:`talker` and the :code:`listener`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To show statistical data about the communication between the :code:`talker` and the :code:`listener`,
```

Author: :+1:

> Follow the steps to :ref:`tutorial_create_dynamic_series` and see this statistical data graphically in a real

Reviewer: ```suggestion
follow the steps to :ref:`tutorial_create_dynamic_series` and plot this statistical data in a real
```

Author: :+1:

time chart.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/screenshots/galactic_tutorial/statistics.png
    :align: center

Introspect metatraffic topics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Fast DDS Monitor filters by default the metatraffic topics and the endpoints related to them so the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fast DDS Monitor filters by default the topics used for sharing metatraffic and the endpoints related to them so the user
```

Author: :+1:

> can inspection its network easily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can inspect its network easily.
```

> These topics are the ones that ROS 2 uses for discovery and configuration, such as `ros_discovery_info`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These topics are the ones that ROS 2 uses for discovery and configuration purposes, such as `ros_discovery_info`,
```

Author: :+1:

> And those used by Fast DDS to report statistical data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 as well as those used by Fast DDS to report statistical data.
```

.. todo:

    Add link to metatraffic section and metatraffic show button

> In order to see these topics in the monitor, click .

Reviewer: click reference is missing

> Now, these topics will be shown in the logical panel, and the Readers and Writers associated to them under their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, these topics are shown in the logical panel, and also the Readers and Writers associated to them under their
```

Author: :+1:

respective Participants.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/screenshots/galactic_tutorial/metatraffic.png
    :align: center

Video Tutorial
==============

> There is a `video tutorial <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OYibnUnMIlc>`_ briefly showing the tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a `video tutorial <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OYibnUnMIlc>`_ going through the steps
```

Reviewer: Video link to be modified after reuploading new version

> that has been explained in this section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
described in this section.
```

Author: :+1:
